---
layout: post
title: "Aim for the center of the target"
image:
category:
tags: [education, learning, training]
---
People often ask me for advice on designing or delivering training material. One
of the most common questions is how you determine the appropriate pace for the
training courses or the lab exercises. It's no surprise, that's a tough
question. The answer is surprisingly straightforward though.

> You should design your course and set the pace for the [median](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Median)
> of your expected audience. Ruthlessly.

Now as with all hard and firm rules, this is a little flexible and we'll talk
about that in a bit. But first, let's talk about why this is the rule I work by.

In any given class you have a certain number of students. You have a
responsibility to each one of these students to provide the best training
possible. But in the real world, we have finite resources. In this case, the
resource we're primarily concerned with is class time and how we allocate it.
The way we can best allocate class time is that which provides the greatest
possible benefit for the greatest number of students.

> The natural response when teaching a class is to make sure everyone is finished
> with an exercise before continuing. This is doing a disservice to the majority
> of your class.

I'm sure I raised a few hackles with this. Put down your pitchforks for a moment
and let's think about this objectively. Each student in your class paid a
certain amount to attend your class and they each deserve an equal share of your
responsibility to deliver the best training you can. The slower students and the
faster students equally. But this is not weighted on their abilities. Each
student deserves an equal share.

Let's consider a few extremes. First let's say that you've got one person out of
18 in your class who is really struggling and takes three times as long to
complete exercises. This means that if you hold back and make sure that all
students complete before moving on then 17 students are twiddling their thumbs
for 2/3 of your class. They've just wasted a ton of money on a class that didn't
push their understanding whatsoever.

If you think about it at the other extreme, it's more obvious. If you've got a
Mensa candidate in your class and the exercises take this person about 3 minutes
to complete, would you crank on ahead and demand that everyone else keep up?
You'd be out of a job soon.

Instead, you need to balance things. You should have an equal number of students
struggling to keep up as are finished early. In this way, you've maximized the
benefit to the class as a whole, with those squarely in the center receiving the
most benefit.

> You should have an equal number of students struggling to keep up as are
> finished early to maximize the benefit to the class as a whole.

Now, this is a bit of a naive approach. You've got trailing edges on a steep
Bell curve. To truly maximize the outcome, you'll want to widen that curve a
bit. You can do this by spending a little more one-on-one time with the slower
students during exercises and by giving the faster students interesting extra
topics to explore. Once common technique I use is to utilize the faster students
as resources to help the other students. They feel valued and often the act of
explaining to others helps to improve their own understanding. I also include
sample solutions to my labs and exercises so that the students who are
struggling have some guidance to help them catch back up.

No matter what you do, you're always going to have outliers. There isn't much
you can do to avoid this, so learn to do what you can to make it easier and more
productive for them. But don't ever let yourself lose track of the bigger
picture. You have a lot of students. They're all looking to you for knowledge.
Do the best you can for **all** of them.
